## Longer illness duration is associated with greater individual variability in functional brain activity in Schizophrenia, but not bipolar disorder

Individuals with schizophrenia exhibit greater inter-patient variability in functional brain activity during neurocognitive task performance. Some studies have shown associations of age and illness duration with brain function; however, the association of these variables with variability in brain function activity is not known. In order to better understand the progressive effects of age and illness duration across disorders, we examined the relationship with individual variability in brain activity. Neuroimaging and behavioural data were extracted from harmonized datasets collectively including 212 control participants, 107 individuals with bipolar disorder, and 232 individuals with schizophrenia (total n = 551). Functional activity in response to an N-back working memory task (2-back vs 1-back) was examined. Individual variability was quantified via the correlational distance of fMRI activity between participants; mean correlational distance of one participant in relation to all others was defined as a 'variability score'. Greater individual variability was found in the schizophrenia group compared to the bipolar disorder and control groups (p = 1.52e-09). Individual variability was significantly associated with aging (p = 0.027), however, this relationship was not different across diagnostic groups. In contrast, in the schizophrenia sample only, a longer illness duration was associated with increased variability (p = 0.027). An increase in variability was observed in the schizophrenia group related to illness duration, beyond the effects of normal aging, implying illness-related deterioration of cognitive networks. This has clinical implications for considering long-term trajectories in schizophrenia and progressive neural and cognitive decline which may be amiable to novel treatments.
